With the primary election looming in May of this year, Republican U.S. Senate candidate Bo Copley of Lenore seems to be overlooked by many political pundits.

Copley gained nationwide popularity when he questioned Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton about her stance on coal at a roundtable discussion at a local health clinic in Williamson in the spring of 2016.

Fast forward a few months and Copley, a former employee in the coal industry, said he felt a strong spiritual force urging him to run for political office. He announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination in May of last year.

Copley will face current U.S. Rep. Evan Jenkins of Huntington and current W.Va. Attorney General Patrick Morrissey in the May primary election. Now former coal executive Don Blankenship has thrown his hat into the ring, which makes for a crowded field. The GOP winner will likely face incumbent U.S. Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.), who also has served as the Mountain State's governor. Manchin has some opposition in the Democratic primary, but is expected to be his party's nominee.

All four of those candidates have huge campaign funds. In contrast, Copley, who was laid off in September 2015 from Arch Coal, has a grassroots campaign underway. He realizes he won't have the big budgets the other candidates have, but he isn't worried.

"I've run into several people who have said, 'You're not going to be able to compete with them,' " Copley said. "But I try to point out to them that money doesn't win a race - it's votes. If enough people are tired of seeing candidates win because they have more money or they have corporate people in their back pockets - we are giving them another option."

He wants people in the state to get a different mindset.

"I'm not going to get the backing from corporate representatives, and I'm not going to get huge donations from people who are going to expect favors in return. We are getting most of our money from everyday people," Copley said of his working-class candidacy. He said he would never ask the salt of the earth type citizens to donate to his campaign because he knows how it is like to live check to check. But, he says when he gets $25 or $50 from someone - "it says a lot. I know at the end of the day people are going to look back and say, 'He is one of us.' "

"We are giving voters a chance to get away from the stereotypical candidate," Copley added.

The Mingo County native said he recently joked at an event in Harrison County, which was also attended by Morrisey. "When I got up to speak, I asked if anyone else wanted to throw their hat into the ring before we get started."

The filing period for West Virginia candidates begins Monday, Jan. 8, and ends Saturday, Jan. 27.

"Everyone has the opportunity to run," Copley said. He said if everyone stays in the race, he thinks it will help him in the long run. "That brings down the total number of votes you need to win," he said of the crowded GOP race. "For someone like myself that is underfunded - it can help me."

Copley will likely get support from the evangelical population of the state.

"I think people in our state, that aren't necessarily Christians in our state, still respect those values," Copley said. "I'm not saying I'm better than any other person - by no means. We need to get people to elect candidates not based on their political affiliations or because of their name recognition. We hope they will vote for people because of their character and what they stand for."

Copley, 40, of Lenore, hopes to be the Republican candidate to challenge Manchin in the 2018 U.S. Senate general election. Copley said what makes him different is that he knows what it's like to be unemployed and sees the struggles coal mining families and others in Appalachia have had in order to make ends meet.

"My entire life I have watched people run for these offices that have no idea how it is to live payday to payday," Copley said. "They don't know what most of us live through each day. You can call that grassroots - but honestly it is just a common sense choice. Do you want someone who has a similar background and that has worked every day?"

He discussed how President Donald Trump was able to gain support and win the nomination and then the presidency. Copley said it is a good example that voters may be changing their views on the types of candidates they want to support. "He definitely wasn't the conventional candidate.

"People are tired of career politicians. They want average citizens to run for these offices. I don't think you get more average everyday than myself," he said with a smile.

Copley said one positive came from losing his job in the mining industry. It has helped him spend more time with his wife and kids. He also volunteers at a private Christian school, Ambassador Christian Academy in Williamson. He said he had been working 11 to 12 hours a day and missed a lot of time with his family.

"I felt like I was at a place where God would open the door for me. It is hard for people who are not believers to understand where I come from," Copley said. "I felt like He would show me the right opportunity. I didn't know that this was the opportunity he was going to present to me."

Of his underdog status, Copley said his chances are "better than ever."

"It would be easy to sit back and look at the campaign funds they have and at their experience - but in today's world, that experience is as much a handicap as it is a benefit.

"I think in May there are going to be a lot of people who are surprised. But I'm not going to be one of them," Copley said.

According to Copley's issue statements on his campaign website, he pledges to "promote coal, oil and gas as the common sense solutions to America's energy needs" and work for immigration reform. On health care, he says he opposes Obamacare but will "fight for affordable health care for all West Virginia families and work to re-introduce competition in the marketplace."

Copley favors tax reform, opposes abortion and says he will work to protect the West Virginia environment.
