Virginia Republicans are anticipating that a state lawmaker will join the GOP primary race for a chance to challenge U.S. Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., next year, according to GOP insiders.

The new contender would be Del. Nicholas J. Freitas, R-Culpeper, an Iraq combat veteran first elected to the General Assembly in 2015 and easily re-elected this year. Freitas would join Corey Stewart, chairman of the Prince William Board of County Supervisors, in seeking the GOP nomination.

Freitas supporters in a Facebook group called Draft Nick Freitas for U.S. Senate have been calling on him to run.

Freitas did not return a phone call, but said two weeks ago in an interview on the John Fredericks radio talk show that he would soon announce a decision on whether to run.

Republicans will gather at The Omni Homestead Resort in Hot Springs the weekend of Dec. 8 for their annual Advance, a weekend of speeches, hobnobbing and politicking. Candidates for office often host hospitality suites.

“I hope to see you all at the Advance,” Freitas wrote Nov. 16 in the Draft Freitas Facebook group, ending his post with a winky face emoticon.

Should Freitas announce, he will face a bombastic primary opponent in Stewart, who was a chairman of Donald Trump’s presidential campaign in Virginia and has pledged to run a “vicious and ruthless” campaign against Kaine. In a June primary, Stewart narrowly lost the GOP nomination for governor to Ed Gillespie, who then lost the general election to Democrat Ralph Northam.

Stewart centered his gubernatorial campaign on protecting Confederate monuments while attacking Gillespie as an establishment figure, and appeared at an event in February in Charlottesville with Jason Kessler, the man who coordinated the August “Unite the Right” rally there that turned deadly.

In October, Stewart mocked transgender House of Delegates candidate Danica Roem over her gender identity. Roem, who is from Stewart’s county, won her race and will join the legislature in January.

Martha Boneta, a GOP activist from Fauquier County, said Freitas is respected by Republicans across the state.

“It’s going to be very difficult to attack Nick Freitas. He’s a combat veteran. He would have given his life for this country in combat and he has a great love for his country. He’s the new face of the Republican Party,” said Boneta, who said she is not yet making an endorsement.

“Nobody can deny that Corey Stewart is masterful at his ability to use social media — I should say use media, in general — by throwing flames. He does have a strong base. At the end of the day, people need to ask themselves who is best to lead Virginia in these unique times that we’re in. And it has to be somebody who’s a fighter and who’s always going to put the constituency, the public, before their own interests.”

Fredericks asked Freitas on the radio show how he’d handle attacks from Stewart.

“He’s going to paint you as establishment,” said Fredericks, who worked with Stewart on the Trump Virginia campaign before Stewart was fired from the position and remained on as a volunteer. “He’s going to paint you as basically a Republican Party of Virginia tool of the elected officials and you’re going to have to run into the Corey Stewart chainsaw. Why would you put yourself through that?”

Freitas said he would be running against Kaine, not Stewart.

“I’m not getting into this with the concern of what Corey’s going to say or what Corey’s going to do,” Freitas said. “I’m going to let Corey run his race and I’m going to run mine, if I decide to run.”

Freitas added: “Trying to paint me as establishment is about as ridiculous as you possibly could go. I’ve been in the General Assembly two years. Take a look at my voting record. Take a look at my stances.”

E.W. Jackson of Chesapeake, a minister who was the GOP nominee for lieutenant governor in 2013, also plans to run as a Republican candidate in next year’s Senate primary, according to a spokesman. Jackson is a social conservative who lost the 2013 race to Democrat Ralph Northam.

The Republican Party of Virginia’s central committee has opted for a primary next year to nominate a candidate to challenge Kaine, who is seeking a second term.

“Tim Kaine’s definitely going to have a robust challenger next year,” said John Findlay, the party’s executive director. The GOP will have a “well-funded, well-organized opponent to highlight how out of touch Tim Kaine is with the voters of Virginia.”
