Nick Freitas and E.W. Jackson, two of three Republicans seeking the party’s nod to run against U.S. Sen. Tim Kaine in November, barely mentioned the Democrat in their debate Monday night, but repeatedly berated former President Barack Obama, who left office 15 months ago.

In responding to a moderator’s questions in front of about 75 Republicans at dinner in The Town Center Club, the candidates expressed similar views on the nation’s overseas wars, tax policy, health care and immigration. Both also praised President Donald Trump, arguing that he has projected a stronger brand of leadership during his first year than Obama did in eight years in the White House.

Freitas, a state delegate from Culpeper County, said he first became interested in a political career while an Army Green Beret serving his second tour in Iraq in 2008, when he learned Obama had been elected president. Freitas said he was “really confused” and felt it was wrong that Americans chose “a philosophy which was trying to convince them that just handing a little bit more power over to the government, a little bit more freedom, a little bit more of their choices – that the government would take care of them.”

Jackson, a Chesapeake minister who served in the Marines in the 1970s, contended Obama disliked the armed services: “For eight years, we kind of all knew that the president didn’t really care about the military. They were kind of side note. We’ve got a president now who genuinely loves our military.”

The third candidate in the June 12 GOP statewide primary, Prince William County Board Chairman Corey Stewart, did not attend the event sponsored by the Republican Professionals Network.

Freitas and Jackson also leveled scorn at the Affordable Care Act, which is considered one of Obama’s major accomplishments. Freitas called it a “cancer” that was designed to fail so that its supporters could replace it with a national government health care system. He and Jackson want to abolish what remains of the law, known as Obamacare. They said a competitive, market-based health care system will lead to lower prices and better services.

Both candidates opposed the Obama Administration’s Iran nuclear agreement that delayed the country’s development of nuclear weapons and praised Trump for threatening to quash it. The Republican president is taking a more aggressive stance against Iran and North Korea that will get results, the candidates said.

Jackson said Trump’s tweets insulting North Korean leader Kim Jong-un by calling him “rocket man” show Trump is a “masterful negotiator” because Kim now wants to negotiate.

The candidates supported Trump’s plans for tighter immigration controls, including building a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border. They praised the recent tax overhaul law passed by the Republican-controlled Congress.

Freitas said the tax changes don’t go far enough. He favors abolishing the federal income tax entirely, replacing it with a national sales tax – known by supporters as a “fair tax.”

Although Kaine was never mentioned, both Republicans agreed with the incumbent’s long-standing view that Congress has wrongly avoided debating and voting on the long-term use of military forces overseas.

Jackson and Freitas, who both want the United States to withdraw almost all its troops from Iraq and Afghanistan, said they supported Trump’s launching of airstrikes against Syria in response to that country’s use of chemical weapons on its civilians. But they argued the president shouldn’t be able to commit troops to long-term conflicts without congressional action.

Freitas said Congress cannot be allowed to “completely abrogate its responsibility and simply say when the war’s popular ‘We got your back,’ and as soon as the war is not popular, ‘It’s on you Mr. President.’ ... I do not think it’s too much to ask that our men and women in Congress display an ounce of the courage that they expect of our men and women when they send them into harm’s way.”

Kaine has made a similar argument for years. He and a handful of other senators have said the congressional approval for the use of military force following the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks has been misused to conduct combat operations against unrelated foes and nations. They want Congress to debate and vote on a new authorization of military force.
