Of the eight people running for U.S. Senate in West Virginia, four have received dramatically more airtime, column inches and public scrutiny than the rest.

The four underdog candidates also generally skipped out on TV broadcasts and direct mailers.

Bo Copley, Jack Newbrough and Tom Willis, Republican primary candidates, said they’ve been left at the margin. They say the polls that decided who makes the debates favor the establishment candidates, and they deserve a fair shake.

Likewise, they say the leading contenders, Rep. Evan Jenkins, R-W.Va., state Attorney General Patrick Morrisey and former Massey Energy CEO Don Blankenship, all have so much political baggage that they may leave room for an outside candidate to eke in.

However, all the Republican candidates had at least one debate to make their case, a luxury not afforded to Paula Jean Swearengin, who is facing Sen. Joe Manchin in the Democratic primary.

The Gazette-Mail spoke to the lesser-known candidates in the primary over the past week to tell their stories.

Tom Willis
Tom Willis was not featured on a debate aired by WSAZ-TV, but his hat was.

“The hat is because Tom Willis is not here based on surveys I’m not sure are independent,” Blankenship said from under a white “Tom Willis for U.S. Senate” baseball cap. “He’s a veteran, he’s a good guy, he deserves an equal chance to unseat the entitlement, or establishment, if you will.”

Explaining the unusual choice of political apparel from an adversary, Willis said he had been talking to Blankenship at a political luncheon earlier in the day and teased that he had a special gift for him — the now infamous hat. Blankenship said he’d wear it, which Willis called a noble gesture, but didn’t think it would happen.

“I thought for sure his staff, there’s no way they’d let him go on with that hat,” he said. “I did not expect to see it, really. But sure enough, he showed up and he wore it.”

Before launching his campaign, Willis worked as a tax attorney for Baker & McKenzie, a multinational law firm. He left to enlist in the National Guard, starting as an enlisted infantryman and working up to his current rank and role as a major and a Green Beret.

After leaving the firm, Willis worked as a venture capitalist and as the current co-owner of the historic Glen Ferris Inn. He continues to serve in the Guard.

Willis isn’t shy to vent about his treatment in the election. He says polling conducted by Fox News and GOPAC are establishment-centered, used to stifle outside threats.

“The system really is rigged to favor incumbents, to favor people in the establishment,” he said. “The media, naturally, is biased toward giving them more credibility. The chattering class, if you will, the chattering class talks to the media, the media talks to the chattering class and talks to the establishment candidates, and it just goes around in a circle.”

Between his military experience, work as a tax attorney and know-how in the business world, Willis said he is as qualified as the leading three, minus the dirt built up from years in politics, lobbying or criminal convictions.

Jack Newbrough
The 2018 Senate campaign did not kill Jack Newbrough, but it came close.

After watching the WSAZ-TV debate, stressed and exhausted from campaign travels, Newbrough woke up around 3 a.m. feeling a “heaviness” in his chest.

The Navy veteran and truck driver checked himself into a VA health facility, then a full hospital where doctors told him he suffered a minor heart attack with 40 percent blockage — below the threshold for needing a stent.

The diagnosis came on a Wednesday. He showed up at a GOP dinner in Kanawha County that Friday.

“I feel fine, I played golf yesterday,” he said before a debate April 30.

He used a cart in lieu of walking the greens. He said his drives were on, but his short-game was off.

Newbrough has proven to be the cowboy of the race. While discussing gun rights at a debate in Wheeling, he said he’s the only candidate on stage who was actually carrying a firearm at the time. That was before he advocated waterboarding people convicted of dealing drugs.

“It was a figure of speech. I didn’t think it would be taken literally,” he said before a debate in which he repeated the idea.

While an unfeasible solution for several reasons, Newbrough said it came up because the opioid epidemic hits close to home for him. He lost his wife, and his son lost his mother, to an opioid addiction.

Adding to his wildcard style, he said at the debate his number one goal is to make sure Morrisey does not win the nomination. He said he will not back Morrisey. Prior to the debate, he said every other candidate in the race, along with Sen. Shelley Moore Capito, R-W.Va., sent him wishes for good health while he was in the hospital — every candidate besides Morrisey.

He said Willis even visited him in person.

Morrisey did, however, issue his condolences on Twitter.

Newbrough said he would be a senator in touch with the people who would protect Americans’ gun rights and protect the right to life.

Bo Copley
Fox has Bo Copley polling at 2 percent, but the former coal miner is still feeling confident.

“Everywhere we go, we run into more people saying, ‘I really like what you have to say,’” he said.

Copley found himself in the spotlight during the 2016 presidential primary when he scored an invite to a roundtable-style campaign event for Hillary Clinton.

There, he challenged Clinton for saying “we’re going to put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business.”

Reading the full quote, in context, it’s clear Clinton was talking about using renewable energy as a vessel to bring economic opportunity to areas suffering from the loss of coal jobs. Nonetheless, the incident underscored the trouble Clinton had connecting with voters in Appalachian areas and a personal distaste for her brand that lingers today.

He pointed to the spat as evidence that he’s not afraid of anyone, but can treat those he disagrees with in a civil and respectful manner.

“I don’t care who I’m faced with, when it comes to my state and it comes to my home, I’ll stand up to anyone in this country the way that I did with Hillary,” he said. “If you do it in a respectful manner, people will hear what you have to say.”

Copley said a lot of people don’t like any of the three leading candidates. His real challenge is finding those people and letting them know he’s out there.

“Don’t worry about polls, don’t worry about who matches up better, voting is about you and what suits you,” he said. “Whatever your needs are, you need to vote according to your needs. The rest will shake out.”

Paula Jean Swearengin
“The working class needs working class representation, I’ve said that over and over and over,” Paula Jean Swearengin said Friday of her senatorial campaign.

Beating Manchin in a primary, Swearengin said, will be a bigger challenge than beating whoever wins the Republican primary.

Running on a platform that includes a push for renewable energy jobs, union support and campaign finance reform, the irony of the chance she runs against Blankenship, who fought unions for years in the mining industry and has a track record of environmental pollution, has not escaped her.

“He rightfully needs his butt kicked by a coal miner’s daughter,” Swearengin said of Blankenship.

Though Manchin said publicly that he would debate Swearengin during the primary, it has never happened.

Swearengin said this lack of debate was a political calculation.

“I think that it’s telling that Joe Manchin won’t debate me, because I think that he’s afraid that I’ll get more name recognition,” she said. “That’s the biggest challenge is name recognition in this campaign.”

Along with the policy differences, Swearengin said Manchin needs to be taken to task for his role in propping up Gov. Jim Justice in his 2016 election, before he switched to the Republican party in 2017.

Swearengin is the only candidate in the race pushing a Medicare-for-all plan. She said she’s confident in her chances.

More than any party affiliation, she said her authenticity as a member of and advocate for the working class will span any political divide in the state.

Backing Swearengin is Brand New Congress, a PAC formed by veterans of Sen. Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign, though that’s not her only run-in with the senator from Vermont. A video of her chatting with Sanders that ends in a tender hug made the rounds during the presidential campaign.
