BUCKHANNON — With questions on topics such as healthcare and education, four congressional candidates participated in Saturday’s forum hosted by Upshur Indivisible-Votes.

Aaron Scheinberg, a U.S. military veteran running for a Second Congressional District Seat as a Democrat, said, “Medicaid expansion through the Affordable Care Act has enabled 211,000 who didn’t have access to healthcare at all, get healthcare.”

“I will do everything in my power to prevent [a repeal] from happening,” he said. “We can’t allow 211,000 West Virginians to lose their health insurance. We have to fix the cost associated with the Affordable Care Act. That’s where I will start. “

Talley Sergent, also running for the Second Congressional District seat as a Democrat, said, “That’s why we need leaders in West Virginia that understand Medicaid is a lifeline to the 211,000 West Virginians who now have it.

“This should not be a partisan issue. Unfortunately, it is. If we keep electing the same individuals we are going to get the same results. I will never vote to cut Medicaid. I will only work to protect it, support it and strengthen it.”

Republican Jack Newbrough is running for a U.S. Senate Seat and said the healthcare issue is where he differs from the Democrats who were seated at the table.

“Under Obamacare, if you are paying $500 a month and you have a $15,000 deductible, that is not health insurance,” he said.

Newbrough said he does not believe Medicaid would be taken away but also doesn’t believe the government needs a bigger role in healthcare.

“Anytime you get the government involved in health insurance, it’s never going to be good,” he said.

Paula Jean Swearengin, running as a Democrat for U.S. Senate,  said she was an advocate for healthcare for all.

“We live in the wealthiest country in the world; there’s no reason we can’t provide the people with healthcare,” she said.

Swearengin said that even people who have health insurance now can’t afford access to healthcare because of the cost.

From healthcare, the forum moved on to economic development.

Scheinberg said, “We have to diversify. We have to invest in the fasted growing parts of the national economy. We have to have infrastructure.”

He said 30 percent of West Virginia not having access to high speed internet is a problem.

One idea Scheinberg proposed was having a national park in West Virginia that would bring more tourism.

Sergent said, “I think deploying high speed internet is the lynch pin. She proposed a 21st century new deal that involves work force revitalization, education with technical and community colleges and a jobs plan that goes beyond traditional industries.

Newbrough cited a veterans in agriculture program as an example of trying something new.

On the topic of strengthening education, Swearingen said that Medicare for all would fix the PEIA program. She also said that more money was needed to make sure teachers are paid competitively.

“Our children are not going to have a different path in West Virginia if they can’t stay here,” she said. “We need to make sure our schools are funded period.”

Newbrough said he had questions about why the teachers and service personnel had organized the work stoppage.

As he learned more, Newbrough said, “I was amazed at how they were really screwing you guys over, to put it bluntly.”

Sergent commented, “As a product of West Virginia Public Schools, I think public education is a cornerstone to the economy. She said the big concern she has is when she asks teachers what she can do to help they say, ‘Let me teach. Get rid of these regulations on our teachers. Let them do what they do on their expertise.”

Scheinberg said, “Every child across West Virginia and across the country should have the best possible education regardless of their zip code.”

He noted that respect for teachers has diminished and teachers are taking home more work on. He said he stood with teachers during the work stoppage and noted they have inspired the country.

Another issue raised was what the candidates would do to address gun violence in the schools.

Sergent said, “I believe in the Second Amendment but as an aunt to children in West Virginia Public Schools, I am terrified for them. We have to make sure we take special interests out of this.”

Newbrough said he was a concealed carry holder and he disagreed with telling someone who is 18 that they can go off to war but can’t purchase certain firearms.

He also said, “Why is this the gun’s fault?

Scheinberg said his grandfather came to West Virginia because he loved to hunt and he supported the second amendment but noted that bump stocks should be banned and that there needed to be improved background checks.

Swearengin said, “I fully support the Second Amendment but I firmly believe we need commonsense gun measures. You should have to have a license to have a firearm.” We have to do everything we can to protect our children in schools and we have to make sure guns do not go in the wrong hands.”

Saturday’s form was held at the First Presbyterian Church. Brooke Scott filled in as moderator.
