Weirton native, United States Navy veteran and professional truck driver Jack Newbrough threw his hat in the race for Senate “to make West Virginia first.”

Newbrough describes himself as a “blue collar guy” and hopes that West Virginia is looking for a change in the Senate.

“My main reason for running is that I’m just tired of West Virginia being last or next to last in every category there is throughout the country,” Newbrough said.

“I’m just a blue collar guy like the majority of West Virginia people are right now. They live pay day to pay day, go to work and struggle to pay their bills and everything else. I just think it’s time for somebody who can relate to them in closer manner than just being a politician who goes to D.C. and looks out for their own interest and not the people of West Virginia.”

First and foremost, Newbrough said that his top priority is to take care of the West Virginia veterans and “take on the VA to get it back where it should be.” He said that he will make sure that the veterans’ healthcare is “taken care of.”

Secondly, he wants to tackle the opioid epidemic facing West Virginia and the rest of the nation. Newbrough said that West Virginia needs to create more funding for rehabilitation centers and available law enforcement needs to “crack down on the dealers and pushers who are bringing it into our state.”

“I don’t think there’s an actual cure for the opioid addiction unless they truly want to come off of it and take care of it themselves, but there has to be some other ways with them talking to more medical professionals who have the experience,” Newbrough said.

“We need to make sure that funding is there that they can help them with that addiction and can get the help that they need. I’ve been asking around all over and talking to the professionals, but nobody’s able to give me a true answer. I’m not a doctor by no means, but I’m trying to find the answers for them.”

As far as providing the appropriate law enforcement, Newbrough said that through talking with state legislators, he found out that the state will be having a police academy in July for the first time in almost four years. So, Newbrough believes that the state will be able to put more law enforcement out on the roads to control the highways around the statelines to “attack” the problem in that way.

Newbrough said that the current opioid crisis is playing a major role in the current state of the economy.

“Everything right now is focused around the opioid problem in the state, especially with the fact the natural gas is booming and the oil drilling and everything like that, but the people of West Virginia can’t pass a drug screening to get these higher-paying jobs to go to work,” Newbrough said. “So you have to tackle that problem first.”

Coming from a family of small business owners, Newbrough said he is supportive of small businesses in the state and maintaining that as part of the economy.

In addition, West Virginia’s supply of natural gas will play a huge part in the economy of the state, according to Newbrough.

Newbrough’s campaign has mostly consisted of traveling around the state reaching out to voters on a “personal level.”

“All I do is go out and travel in my semi,” Newbrough said. “I’m not spending any money on advertising. I’m not putting any signs up. Basically all I carry is a business card, and I feel that resonates with people.”

When asked why the people of West Virginia should vote for him, Newbrough simply said, “Because I’m just like them.”

“I have no idea where I stand at the polls. I can’t afford to do it, but I know that the people reaching out support me by just a handshake,” Newbrough said.

“I take that to heart when somebody shakes your hand and tells you they support you. They actually mean it. I’m just a truck driver and Navy veteran just trying to make a change for West Virginia.”

The primary election for the senate race will be held on May 8. Newbrough is up against Republican candidates Don Blankenship, Bo Copley, Evan Jenkins, Patrick Morrisey and Tom Willis.

The Democratic candidates include incumbent Senator Joe Manchin and Paula Jean Swearengin.
