HUNTINGTON -  Democrat incumbent U.S. Sen. Joe Manchin is seeking a second full six-year term in the U.S. Senate against Paula Jean Swearengin in the May 8 Democratic primary in West Virginia.

Manchin, a former governor, first took office after a 2010 special election following the death of U.S. Sen. Robert C. Byrd.

Swearengin says she is a coal miner's daughter and claims she is the only candidate for U.S. Senate in West Virginia who is not a member of the political elite.

They are the only two candidates for the post in the May 8 Democratic primary election, with the winner facing off against the Republican nominee in the November general election.

Here is a look at the two candidates and their views:

Joe Manchin

Manchin, 70, says he is running to create good-paying jobs that allow West Virginians the opportunity to support their families and save for a secure retirement.

"I want to continue to bring Republicans and Democrats together to find common-sense solutions in the U.S. Senate," he said. "I fought to secure health care benefits for coal miners, and I want to continue fighting to keep the promise of the pensions our miners have earned. I'm running again to protect seniors from Republican cuts to Medicare and Social Security, promote jobs and skills training centers, invest in infrastructure, keep the commitments we've made to our veterans, seniors and children, grow new industries and fight the epidemic of drug addiction."

Manchin said he is the only one who can bring both sides together to get something done.

"You can't build America up if you are too busy tearing each other down," he said. "I listen to West Virginians, and I always do what's best for our state. I've said that Washington sucks, but I'll never give up fighting for West Virginia. For me, it's not about fighting against the other party; it's about fighting for the people I represent."

Manchin says the Affordable Care Act needs to be fixed and not totally destroyed.

"The Republicans have caused premiums to skyrocket and would throw working families to the wolves. I want to put a stop to that," he said. "I stood by our educators, school service personnel and all of the children that deserve a great education in the state."

Manchin said he wants to continue to create good-paying jobs.

"We need new career opportunities that give our people the chance to pay their bills, have decent, affordable health care and a secure retirement," he said. "I'll make sure our seniors don't have to worry about cuts to Medicare or Social Security, and I won't let big corporations walk away from their pension commitments to workers. I'm working to create jobs and skills training centers, make investments in infrastructure and incentives for businesses to hire veterans."

Manchin said rural broadband connectivity is possible.

"I will continue to pass laws to get that accomplished to support jobs," he said. "Broadband is necessary, and the federal government needs to help build this critical infrastructure. It's essential that businesses, entrepreneurs and students are connected to the world and have the tools they need to compete around the globe."

Manchin said West Virginia must end the epidemic of drug addiction and keep the workforce drug-free.

"I will also continue to fight the federal government's overreaching and redundant rules that hamper businesses' ability to succeed," he said. "I want all of our children to get access to a high-quality education. I want our students to have job opportunities when they graduate and the skills to be competitive in the job market."

Paula Jean Swearengin

Swearengin, 43, says she is running on a platform of single-payer health care, a $15 minimum wage, free public college tuition and an end to fracking and mountaintop removal mining.

"I have experienced the best and the worst from being raised as a child of the coalfields," she said. "I understand that coal has been central to my family's income and to the West Virginia economy for most of the last 155 years. The importance of those coal jobs cannot be understated."

Swearengin said she has witnessed firsthand the booms and busts of the coal economy.

"My family was forced to move to North Carolina during one of those busts," she said. "That was the first time in my life that I experienced hunger and homelessness. I have also watched my family, friends and community suffer from the environmental devastation left behind by greedy or unscrupulous coal bosses who use our people, take their profits and leave their coal waste behind."

Swearengin said she decided to stand up for the people and became an environmental advocate.

"I soon learned that the issues run deeper than just the environment and are really about the larger issue of basic humanity," she said. "West Virginians are proud, hardworking people that have given our blood, sweat and tears to power a nation. Yet, despite the riches underneath our feet, we continue to be among the poorest, sickest, least technologically connected and least respected people in the country."

Swearengin said she is running for U.S. Senate because a change in the power dynamic is needed.

"The elites have run this country for too long, whether their names are Manchin, Clinton, Trump, Rockefeller, Bush, Blankenship, Jenkins, Murray or Justice," she said. "It is time to take on this power elite head-on, and I intend to do it."

Swearengin said she will take a different approach to the opioid epidemic.

"You have heard every candidate say they are going to fix this problem, and yet no one has issued a plan other than 'lock them up,'" she said. "That changes starting with my first term in office. I have visited with chronic substance users, law enforcement, judges, treatment centers and recovery groups. They all tell me the same thing: 'We can't lock our way up out of this situation.' We have a self-defeating system where legislators get elected from writing get-tough legislation, police officers are under pressure to make more arrests and prosecutors make a name for themselves by demanding maximum sentences - all of this for a problem that we all agree is more of a public health problem than anything else.

"With the experts, I am in the process of developing a multipronged approach to work with the users in a true public health model that includes treatment, replacement therapy, Narcan on demand, safe injection sites, decriminalization and regulation of narcotics to eliminate deadly substances like fentanyl and long-term recovery options."

Swearengin also favors cannabis legalization.

"I believe cannabis should be legalized for both medical and recreational use as soon as possible," she said. "West Virginia is losing millions of dollars in tax revenue to states that have legalized or are in the process of legalizing marijuana. Again, if it's regulated, we can monitor the distributors and the purity, thereby moving marijuana from the streets to the pharmacies and dispensaries. Marijuana is not going away. Let's make it legal, safe and taxable."

The primary election is Tuesday, May 8.
