The Tim Kaine campaign kickoff tour continued Thursday with a stop at Central Virginia Community College, where the Democratic senator laid out his legislative priorities and fielded questions from constituents over topics that included economic issues, gun violence and banking regulations.

The theme of Kaine’s re-election campaign is “a Virginia that works for all.”

Kaine said that means jobs, education, health care, security and equality for all.


“I’m running again because I want to keep building a Virginia that works for all, and I’m really proud of what Virginia is doing, and I’m inspired by the Virginians I meet every day,” Kaine said in an interview following his remarks at the campaign rally that was attended by roughly 100 people.

At CVCC, Kaine touched upon the need to create jobs in infrastructure and renewable energy.

“I think infrastructure is a huge opportunity because the president wants to do infrastructure,” Kaine said.

He added the U.S. needs to invest in infrastructure rather than start trade wars that “could potentially hurt American workers,” a swipe at President Donald Trump’s call for tariffs on certain Chinese products.

Kaine also said with infrastructure comes a need for workforce development.

“If we do infrastructure, there will be a real burden on the shoulders of our educational institutions,” Kaine said, noting career and technical programs will be asked to fill that need.

“The most important thing to economic development is ultimately the talent of the workforce.”

Nat Marshall, a CVCC Local Board member who introduced Kaine and spoke briefly about workforce development, said schools need to encourage career exploration at the sixth-grade level to open students’ eyes to opportunities in vocational fields they otherwise may overlook as options.

Marshall said CVCC has a place in helping train a workforce to meet the goals Kaine outlined.

“Community colleges are the most flexible institutions that can do that,” Marshall said.

In his address to constituents, Kaine also said the U.S. needs to raise the minimum wage over time.

“I don’t think anybody in the country should work full time, have a dependent and be below the poverty line,” the senator said, drawing applause from a friendly crowd wearing Kaine 2018 stickers.

Though Kaine’s opening address stuck to his campaign planks, questions from the crowd varied.

Kate Staton, 15, a sophomore at E.C. Glass High School, asked Kaine about gun violence and why it has taken national student walkouts to prompt a dialogue about fatal shootings across the country.

“It shouldn’t, but I’m so proud of you guys, I really am,” Kaine answered.

He said as a former mayor of Richmond, former governor of Virginia and as a senator, he has called for “more commonsense rules about gun safety,” pushing for background checks, assault weapons bans, limitations on high-capacity magazines and stricter regulations on purchasing firearms at gun shows.

“My plea to you is keep doing what you’re doing,” Kaine told Staton.

He added he has grown despondent over the lack of congressional action to prevent gun violence.

“We the students simply don’t feel safe going to school,” Staton said in an interview.

She added she appreciated the efforts the senator has made but wants immediate action.

Kaine also fielded a question about cyber threats and malicious companies sharing personal data.

In response, Kaine said the U.S. needs more cybersecurity professionals, and there should be consequences for companies that allow private user data to fall in the hand of malicious actors.

One constituent asked if there was a congressional answer the rise of misinformation and political polarization, noting members of her own family were divided over the Trump presidency.

Kaine said the answer isn’t censoring content but pushing critical thinking in schools.

He added he has major concerns about Trump, saying the president divides Americans rather than uniting them and undercuts diplomacy with his tweets and turnover in the administration.

The senator added he plans to campaign on what he hopes to accomplish in another term, rather than focusing on the issues he has with Trump’s leadership and the Republican Party.

 “Fundamentally, my campaign is going to be about a Virginia that works for all,” Kaine said.

Kaine’s stop at CVCC was part of an eight-day campaign kickoff across the commonwealth. Thursday was the fourth day.

Kaine was elected to his first term as a U.S. senator in 2012 after serving as Virginia’s  governor from 2006 to 2010.

The senator also appeared on the Hillary Clinton ticket in 2016 as a vice presidential candidate.

Running against Kaine are Matt Waters as a Libertarian and Nick Freitas, E.W. Jackson and Corey Stewart on the Republican side.
