WHEELING, W.Va. (WCHS/WVAH) — GOP Senate candidates U.S. Rep. Evan Jenkins, West Virginia Attorney General Patrick Morrisey, Don Blankenship, Tom Willis, Bo Copley, and Jack Newbrough took part in a debate hosted by The Intelligencer and Wheeling News Register at Wheeling Jesuit’s Troy Theater.

This was the first and only debate scheduled to include all six candidates running for the Republican nomination for the U.S. Senate seat before the primary election.

"People are tired of having career politicians move into these positions and make decisions for us,” Copley said.

Willis said there is a certain type of candidate right now who is winning races "non-politician, a political outsider who has maybe a business background and is a veteran."

While they all support President Donald Trump, they said they do so for different reasons.

"I’m the candidate to beat Joe Manchin, and I’m working with Donald Trump and making sure that Donald Trump does not get impeached. I’m a proud conservative, and I’m a proud Republican," Jenkins said.

Topics ranged from welfare, to gun control to the opioid crisis.

"We shouldn't be giving welfare recipients benefits that make it more attractive to stay at the house than work,” Blankenship said.

On the topic of gun control, Morrisey said "far too many people have been subject to violence, but the answer is not gun control, the answer is to take a comprehensive look at what's going on in our schools.”

Newbrough the opioid crisis is a personal issue with him.

"My son's mother lost her life to opioid addiction 10 years ago," Newbrough said. "He's 12 years old now and with her taking the prescription drug, he suffers from ADHD and autism."

In regards to the opioid crisis, Jenkins said, “We need to get our state moving in the right direction, and we need to get the big dirty, big pharma money out of politics.”

All candidates received the chance to defend any public criticism, including Blankenship regarding his position at the time of the Upper Big Branch Mine disaster in 2010.

"The UBB tragedy and aftermath is actually going to help in this election in the coalfields, because the coal miners know what really happened,” Blankenship said.

Another debate will be held May 1 in Morgantown for the candidates who reach 10 percent in the polls this week.
