MARTINSBURG–The Berkeley County Republican Club hosted its annual Lincoln Dinner spring fundraiser Thursday evening.

The dinner honored Delegate John Overington for his 34 years of service as a West Virginia legislator with a Certificate of Special Congressional Recognition from U. S. Representative Alex Mooney and gift card from the club.

“Can you imagine, 34 years? He goes to all the events and supports everybody. He answers his emails and is very giving,” said Lala Mooney, who presented the certificate to Overington.

Following the dinner, four of the six Republican candidates vying for Senator Joe Manchin’s seat spoke about their stances on handling illegal immigration, national security and the economy. U. S. Rep. Evan Jenkins and Jack Newbrough, of Weirton, could not attend.

“We have a great state motto here: Mountaineers are always free. One of the reasons I’m running for Senate is because as Attorney General I can only go after the bad guys. If you send me to the Senate, I’ll go after the stupid laws, too,” said W.Va. Attorney General Patrick Morrisey, who said he is the only one of the four candidates endorsed by West Virginians for Life and all of West Virginia’s conservative political organizations.

Morrisey said he would deal with illegal immigration with a supply-demand perspective.

“One of my drill sergeants said, ‘Don’t walk by trash, make it right,’ and that stuck with me,” said Green Beret Distinguished Honor Graduate and former Special Forces team leader Tom Willis, who is still a member of the National Guard. “It’s important for West Virginia to send a veteran to Washington to deal with national security concerns. We need a non-politician, a veteran to beat Joe Manchin.”

Willis said he would apply that mindset in Washington, D. C., and as a veteran would appropriately represent West Virginia, which is the state with the highest number of veterans. He said none of West Virginia’s Congressional representatives are veterans.

Willis hopes to strengthen the state’s economy through his involvement with Jobenomics West Virginia, which has a plan to create 15,000 jobs throughout the state.

“We need to sell more than timber and coal. We need to be out front on technology,” said retired accountant and business executive Don Blankenship.

Blankenship said he is confident the charges against him, alleging his conspiracy to violate mine safety and health standards, will be overturned.

First-time political candidate and laid off miner Bo Copley, of Mingo County, agreed with Blankenship about the need to diversify West Virginia’s economy. He also spoke about his confrontation of then-presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton in a 2016 round-table discussion about her position against coal. He said his winning Manchin’s seat would be ironic, since Manchin supported Clinton’s election.

“I think it would be poetic justice if you would allow this out-of-work miner to take Senator Manchin’s place,” Copley said.
