HUNTINGTON - Several recent polls show three of the six Republicans running for a West Virginia seat in the U.S. Senate locked in a competitive race to win their party's nomination in the May 8 primary election.

West Virginia Attorney General Patrick Morrisey, U.S. Rep. Evan Jenkins and former coal baron Don Blankenship appear to be running in a tight three-way primary, while the three other candidates - Tom Willis, Jack Newbrough and Bo Copley - are trailing the top three with single-digit poll numbers.

With the popularity of President Donald Trump in West Virginia, the Republican Party thinks it can pick up a seat in the Senate currently being occupied by Democrat Sen. Joe Manchin, who is seeking re-election in the Democratic primary on May 8. Manchin faces Paula Jean Swearengin in the Democratic race.

Here is a look at the six Republican candidates and their views:

Patrick Morrisey

Morrisey says as West Virginia attorney general, he has worked tirelessly to defend conservative West Virginia values, including defending life; expanding gun rights; suing President Barack Obama's EPA and protecting coal; suing Obama over Obamacare and his illegal amnesty program; and finally, aggressively tackling the opioid tragedy in West Virginia.

"Now, I'm running for Senate to continue this fight and protect West Virginia from the liberals in Washington," he said. "I have worked with President Trump as attorney general to protect our West Virginia conservative values, and I look forward to standing with President Trump as West Virginia's next U.S. senator."

Morrisey says he is the only candidate in this race with a proven conservative record of accomplishing results for West Virginia.

Morrisey wants voters to carefully examine each candidate's past.

"I believe the best way to look at whether a candidate will fight for the issues that are important to voters is to look at what the candidate has done in the past," he said. "My record of conservative results for West Virginia is clear. Time and again, I have stood with President Trump and against President Obama in defense of West Virginia. Unfortunately, my opponents in this primary do not share my record of conservative results."

Morrisey said if elected, his priorities would be twofold.

"First, we need to do everything in our power to bring good-paying jobs back to West Virginia, and that starts with getting rid of the regulatory red tape in Washington," he said. "As attorney general, I was able to make some headway on this issue by suing President Obama, but there is still more to be done. Now that President Trump is in the White House, we have an opportunity to rejuvenate our economy.

"Second, I will continue to focus on tackling the opioid crisis on a holistic basis. Recently, I sued the DEA, which will result in a dramatically reduced opioid supply nationwide. Unfortunately, the very people in Washington who were supposed to protect us from a deluge of pain pills have been asleep at the switch. It's critical that we hold these people accountable and demand action."

Morrisey, of Harpers Ferry in Jefferson County, is West Virginia's first Republican attorney general since 1933. He was elected in 2012 and re-elected in 2016 and says he is a conservative champion for Mountain State families and taxpayers.

Evan Jenkins

Jenkins, of Huntington, says his platform is also consistent with President Trump. He claims he is the only candidate in the Republican field who supported Trump from the beginning.

"I am a West Virginia conservative who is working with President Trump each and every day for our shared conservative values," he said. "My beliefs and principles are resolute. I believe that our constitutional rights cannot be restricted."

Jenkins said his record is 100 percent pro-life and 100 percent in favor of the Second Amendment.

"I have a perfect rating from the NRA and am proud of it. I have fought tooth and nail to defend our constitutional rights and the Second Amendment and will continue to do so as your senator," he said. "My commitment to the sanctity of human life has never, and will never, waver. With a 100 percent pro-life voting record in Congress, I have always stood on the side of life. In the U.S. Senate, I will remain a champion for the unborn."

Jenkins says if elected that he would focus on creating jobs, which he believes solves a lot of problems.

"The Obama administration's policies have devastated our state and led directly to the loss of good-paying West Virginia jobs," Jenkins said. "I believe that a good job solves a lot of problems, and getting people back to work is critical to ending the opioid crisis that has destroyed too many lives. I'm focused on bringing a pro-jobs agenda to Washington, one that will provide certainty to West Virginia businesses and create jobs for the hardworking families in our state. And I will stand up to the Washington liberals to protect our God-given rights."

Don Blankenship

Blankenship, of Sprigg in Mingo County, says he is running on a platform that is very much in line with Trump.

"Regulations have cost us our economy and, to a great extent, our quality of life," he said. "We also need to stop illegal immigration and build the wall. This is very much in line with President Trump."

Blankenship said he is an anti-establishment candidate and is not a career politician. He says he wants to tackle federal government waste, create jobs, support coal, help stop the opioid epidemic and close the borders.

"I am socially very conservative on abortion and a strong believer on the First and Second Amendments," he said. "I have more experience by far than any other candidate in dealing with the government from the outside. The other candidates are very much establishment and government guys."

Blankenship says he is also the only candidate that has created jobs.

He is the former CEO of Massey Energy. He was convicted of a misdemeanor charge of conspiring to willfully violate safety standards in relation to the Upper Big Branch mine explosion that killed 29 people. He served a year in prison, all the while saying he was innocent.

Tom Willis

Tom Willis, of Hedgesville in Berkeley County, says West Virginia needs strong representation in Washington.

"We need good jobs and support for small business," he said. "We need someone actively protecting our Second Amendment rights, and we need someone who will promote West Virginian family values, to include protecting the unborn, standing up for us in Washington."

Willis says he is the only candidate in the race who is a veteran and says he is a "non-politician."

"I'm a combat veteran, an officer in the West Virginia National Guard and a Green Beret honor graduate," he said. "As a tax attorney, I also understand how complex the tax codes are and how they stifle business growth and entrepreneurship. I'm a business owner, husband, father and a man of faith. My real world experiences, training, expertise and beliefs make me the most qualified and best candidate running."

Willis said one priority for him, if elected, would be to address the opioid epidemic.

"West Virginia has one of the worst opioid drug addiction problems in the country but hasn't seen federal funding to match," he said. "We need to be open to giving people second chances, including alternative sentencing, and be open to working in cooperation with faith-based recovery programs that statistically reduce recidivism rates. We must address the hopelessness at the root of the problem and deal with it with compassion."

Bo Copley

Bo Copley, of Delbarton in Mingo County, says after working for 11 years in the mining industry he was abruptly laid off in September 2015.

In May 2016, Copley was seated at a roundtable discussion with Hillary Clinton and U.S. Sen. Joe Manchin, D-W.Va., where he confronted Clinton on her words of "putting coal miners and coal companies out of business."

Subsequent to the 2016 presidential race, Copley was named one of 16 people who influenced the 2016 election by Yahoo News.

Copley says he is running as a constitutional conservative who, as a U.S. senator, will introduce and promote legislation that will protect unborn children, foster job growth and promote the well-being of all West Virginians.

"I am a West Virginian, not a politician," he said. "I am not using this race as a stepping stone to higher office, and am running because I believe Washington needs more middle-class Americans in office who can relate to the struggles West Virginians face every day."

Copley says he would breathe fresh life into a U.S. Senate that is currently dominated and controlled by special interest groups and career politicians.

"I am both a lifelong Republican and West Virginian, which cannot be said by some of the other candidates," he said. "I have worked in the private sector my entire life."

Copley says he is against abortion in any form.

"As a devout Christian and father of three beautiful children, I cannot one day meet my maker and say that I support abortion in any form," he said. "I oppose abortion in all shapes, forms and sizes and believe that life begins at conception. I will fight each and every day to protect the unborn."

Copley said his priorities, if elected, would also include jobs, energy and education.

"The key to a strong economy is a citizenry that is employed," he said. "In order for West Virginians and Americans across the U.S. to find good-paying jobs that can support families, we must make it easier for businesses to operate. High tax rates are devastating to businesses and individuals, and America needs to cut its frivolous spending as well as its tax rates.

"I pledge to work tirelessly to defend West Virginia's interests from Washington bureaucrats and to promote coal, oil and gas as the common-sense solutions to America's energy needs."

Jack Newbrough

Jack Newbrough, of Weirton in Brooke and Hancock counties, says he is running on a "veterans first and foremost" platform, along with doing something about the opioid crisis in West Virginia.

"I'm a U.S. Navy veteran and an over-the-road truck driver," he said. "I'm a native West Virginian, born and raised."

Newbrough calls himself the "blue collar candidate."

"I drive semis for a living and make about $45,000 a year," he said. "I am just like most West Virginians who are benefiting from President Trump's tax cuts. I see all issues with illegal immigration and infrastructure every day."

Newbrough says if elected, his priorities would be to fix the VA and tackle the opioid crisis head-on.

"Everything that is happening in West Virginia has affected me personally," he said. "My son's mother lost her life to opioid addiction about 10 years ago. With her taking opioids while being pregnant has caused my son to suffer from ADHD and autism."

Newbrough says he has taken no donations from anyone or accepted donations from special interest groups like his opponents.

"I would love to prove a point that you don't need to raise millions to win an election," he said.
