For those of you concerned about whether Russians and other bad actors around the globe are trying to subvert our nation’s democracy and set us against one another by interfering in our electoral process (they are, by the way), here’s your chance to fire back: Go vote. That’s what patriots do.

Apathy is the weapon of those who oppose us and our institutions of freedom. Enemies of our republic want us to care less, to leave decisions to someone else, to acquiesce, to take what comes. They want us to believe that a single vote does not matter.

Well, it does, especially in races where vote totals will be in the hundreds, not hundreds of thousands. There are a good many school board races on the ballot this spring – and for those candidates, this is not a primary but the real deal.

Likewise, there are many races for the state House of Delegates and state Senate where a single vote could carry the day for some fortunate candidate.

You can also do the math and come to a realization that one vote per precinct could make a world of difference in a race for Congress – for either the U.S. Senate or the Congressional 3rd District – especially if there are more than just a couple of candidates running for office, as there are in both of these contests.

So, yes, your vote can make a difference, but only if you exercise your right as guaranteed by our nation’s constitution.

The other piece of business you will need to attend to is finding a candidate who is worthy of your support – and you just may have to look beyond the canned goods.

While we are not endorsing any candidate in any race for the primaries (we will in the fall for the general election), there are quality candidates on both sides of the political aisle.

And, if you are like us, more than a bit disappointed with those candidates who seem to be favored heading toward the wire, we would encourage you to consider candidates who may be just off the radar.

For instance, Tom Willis – a candidate for U.S. Senate and a conservative’s conservative – seems like the kind of fresh face who is unsullied by Big Pharma or the political donor class. If you are a Republican and would like a candidate who has boots-on-the-ground military knowledge of foreign affairs, if you are looking for someone who knows first-hand the challenges of running a business that caters to tourists here in West Virginia, well, maybe he’s your guy.

Likewise in the race for Congress out of the 3rd District, again on the Republican side of the ledger, Dr. Ayne Amjad has impeccable credentials – as a person and a professional. A Beckley native who was educated in both private and public schools and received a Masters degree in Public Health ahead of her Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) at Marshall University, Amjad seems to be the kind of collaborator, consensus builder and thinker that is needed in D.C. to attend to the people’s business. You want to solve the opioid crisis? Who better, a politician or a doctor who has been on the front lines? You want to shake things up and drain the swamp? How about electing a person of high character, steeped in integrity, who is as honest as the day is long.

Again, these are not endorsements but only an acknowledgement that citizens do have options beyond the obvious, beyond incumbents, beyond the same-old, same-old. There are other fine candidates on the ballot.

And for those who have yet to cast a ballot, you can bone up with a little research at various online sites – including register-herald.com.

Go ahead, get cracking. Do a little homework. And then head to the polls on Tuesday. It’ll really tick off some Russian bot and make you feel proud to be an American – exercising a freedom so many have died to protect.

Be a patriot. Vote.
