WEIRTON — Tom Willis feels his momentum is growing in the race for representing West Virginia in the U.S. Senate.

Willis, among the Republican field of candidates hoping to unseat Joe Manchin in this year’s election, was in Weirton Wednesday, meeting with residents and discussing some of his plans if elected.

The Hedgesville, W.Va. resident admits his campaign had a later start than those of other candidates, and as a non-politician he doesn’t have the name recognition of others, but he has seen voters begin to pay more attention to his message.

“We know we are within clear striking distance of first place,” Willis said. “It’s anybody’s race at this point.”

Willis is seeking the Republican nomination in West Virginia’s May 8 primary election, facing off against Don Blankenship, Bo Copley, U.S. Rep. Evan Jenkins, state Attorney General Patrick Morrisey, and Weirton resident Jack Newbrough.

“I’m not an established politician,” Willis said. “I’m not a career politician.”

Willis said he sees a need to focus on economic development in the Mountain State, explaining he recently was named the director of Jobenomics, an organization which places a focus on people in job creation.

“We need to change the culture in West Virginia to more of an entrepreneurial mindset,” Willis said, noting 80 percent of new jobs are created through small business. “That’s the path forward.”

Jobenomics, he explained, has a plan aimed at created 15,000 jobs in the next six years by recruiting those interested in starting their own small business, providing them with training and educational opportunities and assisting them with finding capital to fund their start-up efforts.

Willis said he feels his own experience as a business owner, operating the Glen Ferris Inn in Fayette County, will be an asset in Washington, D.C., as it gives him a first-hand perspective on the needs of small businesses, as well as how businesses are affected by federal taxation and regulation.

While he said there has been growth in West Virginia’s Eastern Panhandle, and the state’s Northern Panhandle has seen a surge because of the natural gas industry, more work is needed.

“There are parts of our state that are doing well, but much of our state is suffering,” he said.

Willis also is a veteran, first coming to West Virginia in 2000 to join the National Guard. He is a Green Beret and remains active in the West Virginia National Guard Reserves.

He said his military experience will provide needed insight in national defense issues, whether in the Middle East, with Russia or even with allies in Asia.

“We’re engaged in a long-term chess match with these countries,” Willis said.

Willis noted only around 20 percent of current members of Congress have served in the military.

No one currently representing West Virginia at the federal level has served, he said, adding the state has the highest percentage of residents who are veterans compared to the rest of the country.

Noting he is pro-life, and an advocate for the Second Amendment and the Tenth Amendment of the Constitution, Willis said he wants to make sure the federal government plays its proper role.

“The business of governance is serious business, and it affects us every day,” Willis said. “I want to be a part of the solution at the federal level.”
