Morrisey receives endorsement from Family Policy Council

HARPERS FERRY, W.Va. - Republican U.S. Senate candidate Patrick Morrisey has received the endorsement of the Family Policy Council of West Virginia, an organization allied with the Family Research Council, a socially conservative organization.

The organization, which is committed to advancing faith, family, and freedom in public policy, cited Morrisey's proven track record of fighting for the unborn and standing up for conservative values in its decision.

"For years, Patrick Morrisey has taken fiery darts from the hostile media because he's consistently defended the unborn," said Allen Whitt, president of the Family Policy Council, in a news release. "He's also a skilled tactician whose legal strategy prevented Obama's co-ed, public school bathroom disaster from endangering our schoolgirls in West Virginia. We are confident that Patrick Morrisey wins in November."

Morrisey will face Thomas (Tom) Willis, Evan Jenkins, Don Blankenship, Bo Copley and Jack Newbrough in the Republican primary on Tuesday, May 8.

Willis receives endorsement from veteran PAC

WASHINGTON, D.C. - U.S. Senate candidate Tom Willis has received the endorsement of the National Defense Political Action Committee, a PAC committed to electing veteran candidates to Congress who are committed to reforming the VA and rebuilding our military.

The PAC determined Willis, a Green Beret veteran and West Virginia National Guardsman, is the best candidate in the West Virginia Senate race to fight for national defense and to look out for men and women in uniform, according to a news release.

"With veteran representation in Congress at historic lows, it's a tragedy West Virginia has no veterans in its Congressional delegation ... West Virginia's National Guardsmen, military families, and deployed active duty military personnel need elected representatives, like Tom Willis, who understand the impact of sending our troops into harm's way with wholly inadequate budgets, as Joe Manchin's done since he went to the Senate," said Bob "Shoebob" Carey, a retired U.S. Navy Captain and chairman of National Defense PAC.

Willis will face Patrick Morrisey, Evan Jenkins, Don Blankenship, Bo Copley and Jack Newbrough in the Republican primary on Tuesday, May 8.
