When former Green Beret Tom Willis decided to venture into politics, he didn’t tiptoe.

He surged.

Willis, co-owner of the historic Glen Ferris Inn in Fayette County, a tax attorney and a National Guardsman, blew past the state level races and a shot at the Republican congressional seat in the GOP primaries.

Instead, Willis set his sights on the same prize Rep. Evan Jenkins wants — Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin’s seat in the United States Senate.

It was inevitable that he’d want to go after a Senate seat, he told The Register-Herald.

“The simple answer is because I’m going to win,” he said. “Because I can.

“I’m the best guy to beat Joe Manchin.”

Pointing out that he’s a veteran and West Virginia business owner, Willis said has spent much of his adult life in 20 countries on several continents as a Green Beret and second in command of a U.S. Army Special Forces Battalion. He also speaks four languages.

“I think internationally and nationally ... What good is that going to do me, as a delegate from Berkeley County?” he asked. “The job I can do, better than anybody else, especially Manchin, is U.S. Senator.”

Willis’ battlefield for the GOP primary is tough and includes not only Jenkins, who recently accepted an endorsement from President Donald Trump, but also coal baron and longtime Manchin foe Don Blankenship, and West Virginia Attorney General Patrick Morrisey, a Brooklyn native and former Washington lobbyist.

He said he decided to enter the political realm because the state needs help. He noted that West Virginia has the highest number of veterans per capita, but has no veterans serving the state’s interests on the national level in this district.

He said a commanding officer once stopped to pick up trash from a parking lot and told Willis that if he’s out and notices trash, he shouldn’t walk past it.

“We’re last in everything,” he said. “We have a lot of people suffering in our state.

“There are some ideologies creeping in that are dangerous to the American dream,” he added. “I can’t walk by that trash.

“I know I can be part of the solution. Somebody’s got to stand and say, ‘Hey, we’ve got problems, but with leadership we can find solutions.’

“It’s just a call to service. It really just boils down to duty and honor and a call to service. You have a moral obligation, if you see a problem, and I know I can lead.”

He supports Trump’s environmental policies that allow for fewer restrictions on coal production.

His economic vision for the state, however, is detailed — creating 15,000 jobs over the next six years — and depends heavily on small business development. A long-term goal is to wean the state from subsidies, he said.

“The path forward for West Virginia is small business,” Willis said. “Eighty percent of all new jobs are created through small business.

“Our state economic development department is trying to bring in the Proctors and Gambles, like we’ve got in the Eastern Panhandle.

“But if we’re really going to change the state, it’s going to come from small business.”

He said his goal is to bring in a pool of candidates who are interested in starting a business, particularly in select sectors, and to offer access to more than 9,000 online free or low-cost training programs via a partnership with a non-profit organization.

“Qualify them,” he said. “Provide them know-how or business plans. Then you find them capital.

“A senator can get access to capital. We can build Gatlinburg (Tenn.) right here,” he said. “That’s a small example.”

Willis offered his positions on the issues:

President Trump: “People ask, do you support our president? I say, ‘Look, I don’t give anybody a blank check. He’s our commander-in-chief. We should support him. We should pray for him. That’s what we’re told to do. On the economy, I support him 100 percent.”

He joked that Trump’s “biggest mistake” to date was failing to endorse him. He said that Trump has had “unprecedented attacks” by 95 percent of the media.

“The Wall”: Willis said he supports construction of the wall between Mexico and the United States for security purposes. He said an unchecked border allows human traffickers and drug dealers to enter, along with terrorists from foreign countries.

Tax reform: Willis is in favor of a constitutional amendment for a balanced budget.

“I think one of the greatest threats to our national security is our national debt,” he said. “I’ve been to many countries, and they have a fancy plane they bought, fancy weapon systems, but, literally, I talk to the pilots, they don’t have the gas to fly it. They can’t afford the gas, or they can’t afford the bullets.

“Our national debt is a national security risk because it takes money to fund the military.”

Health care: Willis, whose son is a bone cancer survivor, believes that the health care market is a “private sector realm.” To provide more coverage, he proposes allowing insurance companies to operate across state lines and to reduce administrative costs in health care by limiting the amount of damages patients can seek against hospitals.

“We’ve got 200,000 newly dependent on the federal government now,” he said. “They’ve lost that dignity. They’ve lost that freedom. They’re dependent on others for their provisions.”

He said those who can’t get insured in the private sector due to pre-existing conditions should be protected in some way by government, possibly through subsidized premiums purchased on the private market.

“We need to pull them out of the (privately insured) population,” he said. “That reduces costs for insurance companies, so they’re dealing with a predominantly healthy population.”

Veterans’ health care: “I believe the veterans have earned the right to choose, so the veterans should have the choice,” eh said. “Younger veterans prefer private providers.

“We’ve got the VA Choice program that’s working right now,” he added. “The problem with the VA Choice is that it’s run by the VA.”

Reproductive rights: Willis said he believes life is sacred and begins at conception. He would support measures making abortion illegal.

When asked if women who have illegal abortions would be charged with murder or another crime, he did not answer but said he favored avenues of making adoption easier. If a pregnancy must be carried to term under federal mandate, he would consider financial compensation for the pregnant American. He would explore measures to make men more legally accountable for preventing unwanted pregnancies.
